# 4. Abstraction: The Process
###### tags:`OSTEP`

**Process: Running a program**

- Curx of the problem: How to provide the illusion of mutiple CPUs, having only one?
- The OS creates the illusion by **virtualising** the CPU.
- **time sharing**: 
    - A technique that allows **concurrent processes** to be run. 
    - We do it by running one process, then stopping it, then run another process, then stopping it, and so on.
    - Cost: Performance
- Implementation: 
    - Low level machinery: **mechanisms**
    - High level intelligence: **policies**
        - Example: Sheduling Policy
        - using historical information (e.g., which program has run more over the last minute?)
        - workload knowledge (e.g., what types of programs are run)
        - and performance metrics (e.g., is the system optimizing for interactive performance, or throughput?) to make its decision.


## Process
- **Machine State**: what parts of machine are important?
    - Memory
        - Address Space: The entire space that process can access
        - Registers: Program Counter/ Instruction Pointer, Stack Pointer, Frame Pointer
        - Access to Permanent Storage: IO information
- **API**:
    - Create
        1. Load Code & Static Data: Eagerly (all at once) & Lazily (Paging & Swapping)
        2. Allocate Memory 
            - (Run-time) Stack + init, like `argc` & `argv`
            - Dynamically Allocated Heap
        3. I/O related initializations (File Descriptors: std input, output, error)
        4. Start the program (already?) running at `main()`
        5. Handover control to CPU
    - Destory
    - Misc. Control: Suspend
    - Wait
    - Status
        - How long it has run for
        - State
            - Running: Currently Executing Instructions
            - Ready: Ready to run, but not currently executing
            - Blocked: The process cant run till another event is completed (say, process requests disk I/O. The processor blocks the process until the disk returns something ...)
- **Data Structure**: We need some kind of process list, to track the states of all the processes; Ready, to be ran (scheduling) or Running and to be Ready (descheduling) or maybe to wake up the correct process after being blocked.
    - **Context Switching**: OS stops the process, puts the contents in the **register context**; which can then be used to resume the process.

xv6 lists the states as: 
```
// the different states a process can be in

enum proc_state { UNUSED, EMBRYO, SLEEPING,
RUNNABLE, RUNNING, ZOMBIE };
```
