# 8. The Multi-Level Feedback Queue
###### tags: `OSTEP`

Crux of MLFQ: Tries to find a middle ground between *turnaround time* and *response time*

## Structure of MLFQ
- Processes have a certain priority associated with them
    - The priority can be lowered or raised; depending on observed behaviour
- If two processes have the same priority, they are run in the queue **round robin** fashion

More compactly:
1. Priority(A) > Priority(B): Run A and not B
2. Priority(A) == Priority(B): Run A & B in RR fashion

Issues: We need to be able to change the priority. Some jobs may be more interactive by definition (keyboard/mouse tracking) and others may be CPU intensive (running ML models)
3. Init: New job is assigned the highest priority
4. if a job uses entire time slice, priority--
5. if a job uses less than its given time slice, priority remains the same


Issue with 4: What if a job takes up lots of CPU load initially, and then becomes interactive? (like firing up a game?) we have to increase the priority!
Issue with 5: What if a job takes up 99% of slice, and the gives up control; and then demands 99% again? it remains at the same priority!

So, now,
4. after some set time, all jobs move to the top queue
5. alloting a set time for each job. if that expires, it moves down the queue


## Final MLFQ
1. Priority(A) > Priority(B): Run A and not B
2. Priority(A) == Priority(B): Run A & B in RR fashion
3. Init: New job is assigned the highest priority
4. after some set time, all jobs move to the top queue
5. alloting a set time for each job. if that expires, it moves down the queue


## Key points
- because the scheduler doesn't know how long the jobs are (as explored earlier), it assume all are short
- if they are indeed short, well and good. else, we move it down the queue
- **starvation**: if too many interactive processes pile up, there is no space for CPU intensive tasks. we fix it by 4th point; we perediocally **boost** the priorty. Should be not too high and not too low (what are the consequences?)

## Parameter Tuning
- time slice of queues? different for each queue? by how much?
- time allotment of init-ed job?
- periodicity of boosting?

Bonus: Decay Usage Algorithms, Niceness and FreeBSD Scheduler

"MLFQ is interesting because instead of demanding a priori knowledge
of the nature of a job, it instead observes the execution of a job and pri-
oritizes it accordingly. In this way, it manages to achieve the best of both
worlds: it can deliver excellent overall performance (similar to SJF/STCF)
for short-running interactive jobs, and is fair and makes progress for long-
running CPU-intensive workloads."
