# 5. Interlude: Process API
###### tags: `OSTEP`

Start a process today, only with `fork()` and `exec()`!
Use `wait()` for waiting!

## fork()
- **PID**: Process IDentification
- `fork()` creates *an almost* exact copy of the process. To the OS, there are now 2 copies of the program ran.
- The new process does NOT start at main, but starts when the `fork()` is called.
- The PID of the copy, the *child*, is different than that of the *parent*.
- Forking is non deterministic. Child may be run first by the OS, instead of the parent. This is due to **scheduling** decisions made by the CPU, and causes interesing problems in **multi-threading**.

## wait()
- Wait waites for the child process to finish running (and exiting in general)
- By definition, this makes the sequence deterministic.

## exec()
- Loads the code from the static data, given: (the name of the executable , the arguments)
- Overwrites the current code segment, the static data, the stack and the heap. Everything is re-initialised.
- Thus, it does not create a new process, but rather *transforms* the currently running program. After `exec()` is done, its almost if it never ran.

## Why
- We separate them since now we can `fork()` a program and run the shell code, and only then worry about `exec()`.
- **shell**: A user program.
    - You type the command
    - calls `fork()` to create a child process
    - calls (some variant of (there are 6 variants)) `exec()`
    - waits for the process to complete by calling `wait()`
    - done!

RUN THE CODESSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS